# 1.Logic of propositions and predicates

## Propositional Logic 

Def. A proposition $p$ is a variable that can take the values "true" or "false. No others.

Can build new propositions from giver ones.

-----

Logical Operators: 

a) uniary operator(4) 

$$
\begin{array}{c|c|c|c|c}
p & \lnot p & \texttt{ID }p & \top p & \perp_p \\
\hline t & f & t & t & f \\
f & t & f & t & f
\end{array}
$$

b) binary operator($2^4=16$)

$$
\begin{array}{cc|c|c|c|c}
p & q & p \wedge q & p \vee q & p \cancel\vee q & p \Rightarrow q \\
\hline t & t & t & t & f & t \\
t & f & f & t & t & f \\
f & t & f & t & t & t \\
f & f & f & f & f & t
\end{array}
$$

-----

Th. $(p \Rightarrow q) \Leftrightarrow((\lnot q) \Rightarrow(\lnot p))$

Corollary: We com prove assertions by way of contradiction.

Proof: List the truth table and compare the same. 

Remark:
- Agree on decreasing binding strength is the sequence $\neg, \wedge, \vee, \Rightarrow \Leftrightarrow$
- Remaik 2. Higher ordar oprators, $P\left(p_1, \ldots, p_N\right)$ can be constructed from one single binary operator, so called not and(NAND). 

$$
\begin{array}{cc|c}
p & q & p \uparrow q \\
\hline t & t & f \\
t & f & t \\
f & t & t \\
f & f & t
\end{array}
$$

## Predicate Logic 

Def. A predicate is a proposition-valued function of sour Variable(s).

Example: $P(x)$ true or false, dependent on $x$.
$Q(x, y):=x\in y$ will defined later. 

We construct new predicates from given ones: 
- $Q(x, y, z): \Leftrightarrow P(x) \wedge R(y, z)$
- convert predicate $P$ of 1 var into a proposition $\forall x: P(x)$. 
    - Read as forall $x$, $P(x)$ is true
    - defined to be true if $p(x)$ is true independently of $x$. 



feel-good example: 

$P(x) \Leftrightarrow$ (" $x$ is a human being" $\Rightarrow$ " $x$ has been created ). then $\forall x: P(x)$ is true

------

Def. existience quantification:
$$\exists x: P(x): \Leftrightarrow \neg(\forall x: \neg P(x))$$

Corollay, $\forall x: \neg P(x) \Leftrightarrow \neg(\exists x: P(x))$

Remark1: Quantification for precticates of more than one variable, bound and free. 

Remark2: The order of quantification matters. $f_x: \exists y: P(x, y)$ is generically a  different prop.than $\exists y: \forall x: P(x, y)$. 


## Axiomatic Systems & Theory of Proofs

Def. An *axiomatic system* is a finite sequence of propositions $a_{1} a_2, \ldots, a_N$. which are called *axioms*. 

Def. A proot of a proposition $p$ within an axiomatic system $a_1, \ldots, a_N$ is a finite sequence of propositions $q_1, \ldots, q_M$, such that for any $1 \leqslant j \leqslant M$ either: 
- (A) $q_j$ is a proposition from the list of axioms
- (T) $q_j$ is a tautology=independent of vars.
- (H) Models Ponens $\exists 1 \leqslant m, n<j \quad\left(q_m \wedge q_n \Rightarrow q_j\right)$ is true. 

Remark 1. If $p$ can be prove from $a_1, \ldots, a_N$, we often write $a_1, \ldots, a_N \vdash P$. 

Remark 2. This definition allows to easily recognize a proof. An total different matter is to find a proof.

Remark 3. Obviously, any tautology, should it occur in the axioms, can be removed from the list of axioms without impainng the point of the axiomatic system.

-------

Extreme case of this is:axiomatic system for propositionl logic: empty sequence.

Def. An axiomatic system is consistent if there exists a proposition $q$ which cannot be proved from the axioms:
$$
\neg\left(a_1, \ldots, a_n\vdash q\right) .
$$

Idea behind the defn: Consider an axiomatic system certaining contradiction situations:$\cdots, s, \cdots, \neg s, \cdots$, then by the deduction rule (M), we can say everything is true. 

------

Theorem: Propositional logic is consistent

Proof. Sufficies to show that there exist a proposition that cannot be proved wither Propositional logic. 

Prop logic has an empty seq of axioms,
 Only $(T$ ) and $(M)$ must carry any proof.

$\Rightarrow$ only  tautologies can be proved i.e, $q \wedge \lnot q$ cannot be proved. 

-------

Theorem. (Godel)

Any axiomatic system that is powerful enough to encode the elementary arithematic of natural numbers is either inconsistent or contains a proposition that can neither be proned nor disproved.

Proof. (Complicated), basic idea: 
(1) assign to each (meta-) math statement a number, now calls Gódel-number.

(2)  use a "The barber shaves all people in his village who does not shave themselves" - type argument to identify that it is provable or not. 